.TH KOSHELL 1 "2026-07-08" "koshell 0.1.0" "Koshell Manual"
.SH NAME
koshell \- human-centric shared terminal: AI beside your terminal, not above it
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B koshell
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B koshell
.RI [ options ]
.RB [ \-\- ]
.I program
.RI [ args ...]
.br
.B koshell shell-init
.BR bash | zsh
.br
.B koshell preflight
.br
.B koshell daemon
.BR status | start | stop | restart
.br
.B koshell auth
.BR login | logout | status
.RI [ provider ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B koshell
is a transparent PTY wrapper that keeps the human as the primary terminal
operator while giving an AI assistant enough shared terminal context to
explain, diagnose, and assist.
Instead of a separate chat window, you ask questions in place: type
.B #?
on the command line and the answer streams inline (see
.BR "THE #? INTERACTION" ).
.PP
Run without arguments,
.B koshell
wraps your default shell; bash and zsh additionally get shell integration
(precise command boundaries for
.BR #? ).
With a leading positional argument it launches that program instead
.RB ( "koshell python3 -i" ),
and everything after the program name belongs to the program.
.PP
Answers come from a per-user AI daemon
.RB ( koshell-ai-daemon ),
which the terminal starts automatically on the first
.B #?
and which exits on its own after 10 idle minutes.
The terminal stays fully usable as a plain shell wrapper when the daemon or
its configuration is unavailable; the failure is reported inline where the
answer would have appeared.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B shell-init \fBbash\fR|\fBzsh\fR
Print the startup snippet that makes new interactive shells exec into
koshell.
Install it at the top of the shell rc file:
.RS
.PP
.nf
eval "$(koshell shell-init zsh)"    # first line of ~/.zshrc
eval "$(koshell shell-init bash)"   # first line of ~/.bashrc
.fi
.RE
.IP
The snippet is tty-scoped: the shell koshell spawns re-sources the rc file
and skips the exec because it is already wrapped on this terminal, while a
shell landing on a fresh terminal (for example a new tmux pane) wraps
itself.
It stays inert for non-interactive shells, non-TTY stdio, and
.BR TERM=dumb .
To opt one shell out, start it with
.BR KOSHELL_NO_AUTO=1 ;
to disable auto-wrap persistently, create
.IR ~/.config/koshell/no-auto .
.TP
.B preflight
Fast, TTY-free readiness probe used by the auto-wrap snippet as
.BR "koshell preflight && exec koshell" :
it exits 0 only when koshell can start and a real shell is resolvable, so
the snippet keeps the current shell instead of exec-ing into a koshell that
would immediately fail and close the terminal.
.TP
.B daemon \fBstatus\fR|\fBstart\fR|\fBstop\fR|\fBrestart\fR
Inspect or control the AI daemon.
.B status
reports whether it is running (pid, version, uptime, connections);
.B start
starts it if not already running;
.B stop
stops it;
.B restart
stops it if running, then starts it.
The terminal auto-starts the daemon on demand, so these are for manual
control and debugging.
.B start
resolves the daemon the same way auto-spawn does: the
.B KOSHELL_DAEMON_CMD
environment variable, then a
.B koshell-ai-daemon
executable next to the
.B koshell
binary, then one on
.BR PATH .
.TP
.B auth \fBlogin\fR|\fBlogout\fR|\fBstatus\fR [\fIprovider\fR]
Manage AI provider credentials.
.B login
runs the provider's interactive OAuth flow (subscription sign-in for
providers such as
.BR anthropic ,
.BR github-copilot ,
and
.BR openai-codex )
and stores the resulting token in koshell's credential store; the flow
opens the authorization URL in a browser when possible and always prints
it, and Ctrl-C aborts.
.B logout
removes the stored credential.
.B status
reports, per provider, whether a usable credential was found and where it
comes from (a stored login, an environment variable, or
.IR config.toml );
with a provider argument it exits 0 only when that provider is configured.
The commands talk to the AI daemon and start it on demand like the first
.BR #? .
API-key providers do not need
.BR login ;
see
.BR koshell.toml (5).
.TP
.I program \fR[\fIargs\fR...]
Any other leading positional launches that program in the PTY instead of
the default shell, with
.B #?
armed through the output-stabilization path.
A leading
.B \-\-
allows a program whose name starts with a dash.
The names
.BR shell-init ,
.BR preflight ,
.BR daemon ,
and
.B auth
are reserved for the subcommands above; to launch a program literally named
that, use a path form (for example
.BR "koshell ./daemon" ).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-log-level " LEVEL"
Log level filter
.RB ( error ", " warn ", " info ", " debug ", " trace ", " off ;
env_logger module filters also work).
Overrides the
.B KOSHELL_LOG
environment variable.
Logs are written to a file under the XDG state directory, never to the
terminal.
Only recognized before the program name; after it, the flag belongs to the
launched program.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.SH THE #? INTERACTION
Type
.B #? question
alone, or append it to a command line as
.BR "command #? question" .
The question fires when the line's output completes (in integrated
bash/zsh, using precise command boundaries) or stabilizes (directly
launched programs), and the answer streams inline in the terminal.
The first
.B #?
starts the AI daemon automatically if it is not running.
The daemon answers using the model configured in
.IR config.toml ;
see
.BR koshell.toml (5).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B KOSHELL_LOG
Log level filter for both processes;
.B \-\-log-level
wins when both are set.
.TP
.B KOSHELL_NO_DAEMON_SPAWN
Any non-empty value disables daemon auto-spawn.
The terminal then degrades inline until the daemon is started manually;
the explicit
.B koshell daemon start
ignores this switch.
.TP
.B KOSHELL_DAEMON_CMD
Overrides the daemon launch command entirely; the value is used verbatim
(run through
.BR "sh -c" ).
Useful from a source checkout with no installed daemon binary:
.RS
.PP
.nf
export KOSHELL_DAEMON_CMD="bun $PWD/packages/ai-daemon/src/index.ts"
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B KOSHELL_NO_AUTO
Any non-empty value makes the auto-wrap snippet keep the current shell
unwrapped.
.TP
.B KOSHELL_NO_EVENT_LOG
Any non-empty value disables the local dogfooding event log.
.TP
.BR XDG_CONFIG_HOME ", " XDG_STATE_HOME ", " XDG_DATA_HOME ", " XDG_RUNTIME_DIR ", " XDG_CACHE_HOME
Standard XDG base directories; see
.B FILES
for what koshell places where.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/koshell/config.toml
AI provider and model configuration (default
.IR ~/.config/koshell/config.toml );
see
.BR koshell.toml (5).
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/koshell/no-auto
Presence disables the auto-wrap snippet.
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/koshell/koshell.log
Terminal log (default under
.IR ~/.local/state ;
default level
.BR warn ).
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/koshell/daemon.log
Log of the auto-spawned daemon (default level
.BR info ).
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/koshell/daemon.sock
Daemon socket; the directory falls back to
.I $XDG_CACHE_HOME/koshell
and then
.IR ~/.cache/koshell .
The socket doubles as the single-instance lock.
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/koshell/auth.json
Credential store written by
.B koshell auth login
(mode 0600, default under
.IR ~/.local/share ).
It holds OAuth tokens only;
.B api_key
values from
.I config.toml
are never written here.
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/koshell/events.jsonl
Local dogfooding event log (append-only JSONL, metadata only); disable with
.BR KOSHELL_NO_EVENT_LOG .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B koshell
propagates the wrapped program's exit code faithfully, including
signal-death codes.
.B koshell preflight
exits 0 only when koshell is ready to start.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR koshell.toml (5)
