.TH KOSHELL.TOML 5 "2026-07-08" "koshell 0.1.0" "Koshell Manual"
.SH NAME
koshell.toml \- koshell AI provider and model configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/koshell/config.toml
.PP
Default:
.IR ~/.config/koshell/config.toml .
This page is named after the format; the file on disk is called
.IR config.toml .
.SH DESCRIPTION
The config file tells koshell which AI model answers
.B #?
questions, and how to reach and authenticate against its provider.
Koshell owns this configuration namespace end to end: nothing outside this
file (and the documented environment-variable fallback for builtin
providers) is consulted.
.PP
The config selects exactly one active model.
There is no runtime model switching; the file is read when a conversation
is created, so editing it takes effect on the next conversation (a new
terminal), with no reload mechanism.
.PP
A missing or invalid config never breaks the terminal: it keeps working as
a plain shell wrapper, and
.B #?
reports what to fix inline.
There is no silent fallback to another configuration source.
.PP
The schema is strict: unknown keys anywhere in the file are rejected, so
typos fail loudly at the file boundary instead of being ignored.
.SH KEYS
.TP
.B model
Required string of the form
.BR \(dqprovider/id\(dq .
Split on the
.I first
slash, so a provider whose model ids contain slashes keeps them in the id
(for example
.BR \(dqopenrouter/anthropic/claude-3.5-sonnet\(dq ).
The provider part is either a builtin provider name or the name of a
custom
.B [providers.NAME]
block below.
.TP
.B thinking_level
Optional reasoning effort for models that support it.
One of
.BR off ", " minimal ", " low ", " medium ", " high ", " xhigh .
.SH PROVIDERS
A
.B [providers.NAME]
table takes one of two shapes, distinguished by whether it defines
.BR models .
.SS Builtin providers
The builtin catalog is the embedded pi agent runtime's full provider
catalog: 30+ providers and their model lists, endpoints, wire protocols,
and model parameters, updated with each pi release.
A builtin provider therefore needs no
.B [providers.NAME]
block at all when its credential comes from the environment \(em naming a
model is enough.
Commonly used builtin providers and their conventional environment
variables:
.TP
.B anthropic
.BR ANTHROPIC_API_KEY ,
or
.B ANTHROPIC_OAUTH_TOKEN
for a Claude Pro/Max subscription token.
.TP
.B openai
.BR OPENAI_API_KEY .
.TP
.B google
.BR GEMINI_API_KEY .
.TP
.B openrouter
.BR OPENROUTER_API_KEY .
.TP
.B github-copilot
.BR COPILOT_GITHUB_TOKEN .
.TP
.BR deepseek ", " groq ", " mistral ", " xai ", " moonshotai ", " zai
.BR DEEPSEEK_API_KEY ", " GROQ_API_KEY ", " MISTRAL_API_KEY ", "
.BR XAI_API_KEY ", " MOONSHOT_API_KEY ", " ZAI_API_KEY .
.PP
Two providers authenticate through ambient cloud credentials instead of an
API key:
.B amazon-bedrock
uses the AWS credential chain
.RB ( AWS_PROFILE ,
.BR AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID / AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY ,
.BR AWS_BEARER_TOKEN_BEDROCK ,
or container/instance roles), and
.B google-vertex
uses Application Default Credentials plus
.B GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT
and
.B GOOGLE_CLOUD_LOCATION
(or a
.B GOOGLE_CLOUD_API_KEY
key).
.B openai-codex
only authenticates via an OAuth login flow, which koshell does not support
yet.
.PP
This page does not enumerate the full catalog: referencing an unknown
provider name makes
.B #?
report the complete builtin provider list inline, and pi's own provider
documentation
.RI ( docs/providers.md
in the earendil-works/pi repository) describes every provider and model.
.SS Builtin provider authentication
For a builtin provider the model catalog is built in, and the
.B [providers.NAME]
block only carries authentication and optional endpoint overrides:
.TP
.B api_key
Credential for the provider (see
.BR CREDENTIALS ).
When omitted, the provider's conventional environment variable (for
example
.BR ANTHROPIC_API_KEY )
is used.
.TP
.B base_url
Optional endpoint override.
.TP
.B headers
Optional table of extra HTTP headers.
.PP
.B api
is rejected on a builtin block: the wire format of a builtin provider is
known.
.SS Custom provider definition
A block with a
.B models
array defines a provider from scratch and requires all of:
.TP
.B api
The wire protocol the provider speaks.
One of
.BR anthropic-messages ,
.BR openai-completions ,
.BR openai-responses ,
.BR azure-openai-responses ,
.BR openai-codex-responses ,
.BR mistral-conversations ,
.BR google-generative-ai ,
.BR google-vertex ,
.BR bedrock-converse-stream .
.TP
.B base_url
The provider endpoint.
.TP
.B api_key
Credential (see
.BR CREDENTIALS ).
.TP
.B models
Array of model definitions,
.BR [[providers.NAME.models]] :
.RS
.TP
.B id
Required model identifier.
.TP
.B name
Display name; defaults to
.BR id .
.TP
.BR api ", " base_url
Optional per-model overrides of the provider values.
.TP
.B reasoning
Whether the model supports reasoning/thinking; default
.BR false .
.TP
.B input
Accepted input kinds, an array of
.B \(dqtext\(dq
and
.BR \(dqimage\(dq ;
default
.BR [\(dqtext\(dq] .
.TP
.B context_window
Context window in tokens; default 128000.
.TP
.B max_tokens
Maximum output tokens; default 4096.
.TP
.B cost
Optional table of per-million-token prices used only for usage accounting:
.BR input ", " output ", " cache_read ", " cache_write
(each defaults to 0).
.RE
.SH CREDENTIALS
.B api_key
values take three forms:
.TP
.I literal
The key itself, for example
.BR \(dqsk-ant-...\(dq .
.TP
.BI $ ENV_VAR
Read from the named environment variable at use time.
.TP
.BI ! command
Run the command and use its output, for example a keychain or secret-store
read.
The command runs with the user's privileges \(em the same trust model as
the shell profile.
.SH ERRORS
An absent file, a TOML parse error, a schema violation, an unknown model
reference, or missing credentials all surface as an inline
.B #?
error with guidance on what to fix.
Koshell never falls back to another provider or model.
.SH EXAMPLES
Minimal config, key from the environment
.RB ( ANTHROPIC_API_KEY ):
.PP
.nf
model = "anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-5"
.fi
.PP
Key in the config instead:
.PP
.nf
model = "anthropic/claude-sonnet-4-5"

[providers.anthropic]
api_key = "sk-ant-..."
.fi
.PP
A custom provider \(em also how a non-default API type is pinned:
.PP
.nf
model = "mycorp/mycorp-large"

[providers.mycorp]
api = "openai-completions"
base_url = "https://api.mycorp.example/v1"
api_key = "$MYCORP_API_KEY"

  [[providers.mycorp.models]]
  id = "mycorp-large"
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR koshell (1)
